Now that you know all about EHR dataset levels,
we can address dataset splitting.
Being able to split datasets without data leakage will
resolve major issues that can occur with EHR datasets.
Let's learn how to prevent data leakage.
While this may seem like a trivial topic,
is actually something from my experience that is done incorrectly
often and can lead to significant downstream issues later.
Imagine that you spent significant time working on a model and then to
find out that your results are invalid because the data was not prepared correctly.
While this course is not focused on the fundamentals of machine
learning such as how to partition and test your data,
we bring up some ways to help reduce and test when splitting your dataset.
As mentioned earlier, data leakage could be a big problem.
An example where this can occur is when you have
longitudinal dataset and you put different patient encounters across different splits.
You may inadvertently leak an information about
the patient in your training data that you'll be testing on.
A major challenge for most machine learn problems is
generalization and building a dataset that is representative.
Common errors that can occur are not only related to having
a representative distribution of your label across the splits,
but also even for demographics.
Imagine that you split your data into train and test partitions and now you only have
male patients in your train and female patients in your test partition.
This could introduce some unintended biases and issues in
your model for procedures that are gender specific.
It's important to have some ways to assess whether you have split your data right.
Here are a few ways to do this.
We already went over ways in lesson one on how to check
for demographic and label value distributions.
But now we'll focus on splitting at a patient level.
First important point is to make sure that a patient's data is not in
more than one partition so that we can avoid possible data leakage.
Second, we should make sure that the total number of unique patients across
the splits is equal to the total number of unique patients in the original dataset.
This is to ensure that there's not
any patient information loss in the splitting and also that they cancel right.
Third, the total number of rows in the original dataset should be equal to
the sum of rows across all three dataset partitions.
Now that we are finished covering how to avoid data leakage,
you should be able to ensure that your datasets don't leak when you split them.